Good day I'm Norman Wildberger this is going
to be our last video for 2015 and think we've
accomplished quite a lot but there's still a
lot more to do in 2016 it's appropriate that
I end the year with this sort of final video in
this little series on these four different types
of data structures that we've been talking about
Lamm's standing for lists ordered sets multisets
and sets and today's lecture will be about the
final data structure the most familiar one to
most of us that of a set so a lot of what we're
going to be doing today will be quite familiar
to you so I remind you that a list is something
like this our convention is square brackets and
commas an ordered set we have braces and commas
representing the fact that still ordered multi set
square brackets without commas and our convention
for a set is that it's braces representing fact
that repetitions are not allowed and no commas
telling us that rearrangements are allowed so
this for example is an element of set 53 which
means that it's a three set from five all the
elements are chosen from one two three four five
and there are in this case three elements so it's
a three set so in general our convention is that
a que cette from n is an unordered collection
of numbers in the range 1 2 up to n without
repetitions and with all together k numbers
and this gives us a type of object that will
denote by set MK so the objects are all from
the numbers 1 through n and there are K of them
in the set and I convention is to use braces
and no commas so that's quite a difference from
the usual convention but it fits well with this
kind of framework and I think it's more natural
notationally now because we like to be specific
and lay things out with lots of examples so that
everybody knows what exactly we're talking about
let's have a look at sets from five where we're
talking about k sets k ranging from the full range
from zero to five those are the only possibilities
for N equals five because repetitions are not
allowed so set 50 we're talking about 0 sets
from five there's only one of those that's the
empty set when K is one then there are 5-1 sets
set one set to the set three the set for and set
five when K is too there are 10 of these two sets
from five the set 12 13 14 15 23 24 25 34 35 45
now notice that we're trying to lay them out in
a somewhat systematic fashion so you can see the
pattern that I start with the simplest smallest
values and that I increment the last one a lot
like the odometer on a car and once it gets up
to its maximum value then we roll over and go
to the next value for the next left most entry so
the one goes to a to an otherwise we start with
the smallest values and work their way up again
when K equals 3 we're talking about three sets so
looking at triples of numbers from 1 through 5 we
have one two three then again proceeding in this
sort of an odometer fashion 124 125 then we roll
over 134 because that's for the smallest one that
has a one and A three and then 135 then 145 and
then two three four two three five two four five
and three four five and you probably won't be too
surprised to see that there are also 10 of those
in fact there's a kind of correspondence
between the 10 here and the 10 here right
because for any one of these say 235 there's an
Associated one up here which is just the other
two numbers in this case 14 so there's a sort
of a pairing between this one and this one some
kind of symmetry here and similarly when we go
to K equals 4 well there's going to be five of
them corresponding sort of to the five that we
had at the k equals 1 level 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 5 1 to
four five one three four five and two three four
five missing a five here and then missing a for
missing a three missing a two missing at one so
the natural correspondence between these ones and
these ones here and finally k equals five talk
about the full set one two three four five and
that's actually corresponding with our empty set
on K equals 0 so it's a very nice structure very
important kind of structure these objects occur
in many different places especially in algebra
and the binomial theorem of course but it's a
very rich theory theory of sets just in this
very finite specific concrete case so a little
bit more notation and conventions we may as well
introduce this type set n which refers to all the
sets from n in other words the K sets where K can
range from 0 all the way up to n we have obviously
the notion of the size of a set so if a is a que
cette from n then the size of a by definition
is K that's the size of the set so for example
the size of this set here for 21 is of course 3
the size of the empty set is a 0 very important
is this idea of subsets so let's say we have
two sets a and B which are both sets from n
then we'll say that a is a subset of B and
we'll write it like this that means that if
L is an element of a then L is an element of B
and this little epsilon kind of symbol means L
is an element of a now you'll be familiar with
me writing something like this with a little
extended epsilon i like to use that when I'm
refer to something having a certain type it's
very similar to this but this is an honest element
containment where we're talking about sets here
our sets are much more constrained than so the
types that we're always considered so this is
a type it's not a set okay so I don't want to use
this symbol when I'm talking about something like
this I would use the same kind of thing but with a
variant where the little middle bar extends to the
left making it a little bit different so we have
the notion of subset and I think it's probably a
good idea if we are specific about the usage of
this particular symbol in many situations these
two symbols are pretty well the same but there's
some argument to be made that that's a little bit
unnecessary why have two symbols that mean the
same thing and because this subset symbol is
naturally corresponding to the less than or equal
symbol at the level of multiplicities right the
multiplicities of elements and sets are always
either 0 or 1 and this subset relation just as it
is in the multiset case is really corresponding to
the fact the multiplicity of any element in here
is less than or equal to the multiplicity of the
corresponding element in there so we can reserve
this symbol for a being a subset of B but not
actually equal to B we might say a proper subset
that means at least one element of B is not in a
all right so that's a very important idea d of a
subset was that interestingly the subsets of sets
have very interesting structure and this generates
a lot of the interest and structure and sort of
theory of sense this picture here shows you the
kind of subset structure that i'm talking about
that so important and set theory so here's a
very simple situation we're only talking about set
three so sets from three and in this case there's
one empty set there's 31 sets there are three
two sets and 13 set and what we see here is the
containment relations that are determined by this
notion of a subset so the empty set is a subset of
1 2 & 3 & 1 2 & 3 are all subsets of some of
these so one and two are subsets of this one
one and three are subsets of this one and two and
three are subsets of this one that's why we have
these lines here representing the subset kind of
relation and then all of these are subsets of this
one so this is what's officially called a post
set or partially ordered set and that's something
that we will have to talk about in the future
so we're still will lay out that later on but
I'm just flying it here it's a very interesting
additional structure that you get sort of for free
once you start looking at sets you can see in this
particular case when n equals 3 that this diagram
has almost a three-dimensional aspect it sort of
looks like a cube sort of flattened out onto the
plane its kind of pleasant and there's a symmetry
the same kind of symmetry that we've remarked on
before between some of this level in this level
in this level in this level of course the numbers
on each level k equals 0 k equals 1 k equals to
K goes three levels these are just a binomial
coefficients 1331 that's not an accident of course
so it's instructive and interesting to see what
the corresponding czar post sets are for bigger
values so I'll leave it to you as an exercise to
draw a similar kind of picture for set for okay
see if you can make a nice picture that looks
like like this one but a little bit more that's
involved so it will turn out that for larger
values that this structure is really the source of
all kinds of interesting combinatorial questions
and results and it's really a core object in
combinatorics there are of course a lot of
parallels between sets and multi sets and in some
ways we can think of sets as being just special
cases of multisets where the multiplicities are
all either 0 or 1 but technically speaking it's
probably better for us if we keep these different
data structures at least officially a separate
nevertheless we can talk about the relationship
between sets & M sets by a device something like
this so if a is a set from n we can associate to
it a multiset a sub M from M set of em just by
replacing the braces in a with square brackets
so for example if a is the set for 21 which is
a set from five then by replacing the braces
with brackets we get a sub M which is the M
set for 21 an M set from five so in this way we
can associate very directly an M set for every
set and that means that our various understandings
and intuitions in fact operations on em sets some
of them will apply to sets but not all of them
because our algebra of em is considerably richer
than the corresponding theory for sets that's a
big advantage in dealing with M sets rather than
just sets so it is tempting to consider sets as
just special kinds of MSS but probably we should
keep the two notions separate at least officially
like a computer that wants to distinguish the type
this with the type of that but nevertheless quite
a few ideas from M sets apply directly two sets
of course not all in particular the notions of
unions and intersections are pretty well exactly
as they are for multi sets so for example if we
have set 12 we want to take the union with a set
134 then basically we look at all of the elements
and take the union of the multiplicities of each
element which is that just a max and this turns
out to be 1 2 3 4 so there's the union while the
intersection means that we're looking at each
of the elements and taking the intersection of
the various multiplicities which is the minimum
and that's than just a single one therefore the
intersection and just as 4m sets we have the
kind of distributive laws that relate unions
and intersections or intersections and unions and
of course we also have the corresponding one where
we interchange the places where the brackets are
we have these kind of absorption laws the role of
the empty set which also is often written with a
Phi instead of these empty braces naturally gives
rise to these two simple laws that a union the
empty set is a and a intersect the empty set is
the empty set so at this point our set theory is
very restrictive because we're only talking about
very specific sets built from natural numbers
whose sizes are bounded in a very precise way
later on we will be enlarging our point of view
but we're going to be doing this in a way that's
taking the four different types of data structures
loms lists or sets mm sets and sets in a kind of
a balanced way so we're going to be extending all
of them and in fact we're going to be starting to
mix these different types of sets eventually as
well as enlarging the kinds of objects that can
be inside these data structures the obvious
thing being that once we have data structures
as well defined objects that we're considering we
can use them as ingredients or elements of more
sophisticated data structures it's a very simple
and natural way of building up rather elaborate
hierarchies of complicated data structures
and there's all kinds of interesting questions
associated with that so very good we've covered
sets at least a rudimentary kind of introduction
to assess we're going to be now looking at a set
theory in the modern pure mathematics in a rather
critical way in 2016 so I am going to have to be
rather merciless in being honest and critical of
the very sad logical structure that modern pure
mathematics is in with regard to set theory and
corresponding axiomatic it really does not work
and i'm going to show you explicitly why and
you're going to see why mathematicians actually
spend a lot of effort avoiding that entire issue
no one talks about it too much officially there
are these almost religious frameworks that we
officially agreed to but nobody actually looks
at them that carefully except for sort of the
set theorists themselves unfortunately when we do
look carefully at the axiomatic they all start to
appear very in precise and in fact arbitrary and
the logic just isn't there the difficulties that
set theory had more than a hundred years ago with
the discovery of fundamental paradoxes has not
really effectively been resolved as that's the
main point and what we have now is really just a
bunch of wishful thinking which is pinned up okay
so we have to address this I mean it's really time
that we had a little bit more of an adult approach
to things so 2016 we are going to have a more
adult approach to set theory and its difficulties
but I don't want to just be negative we are also
going to be building up rather interesting aspects
of this data structure theory so there's really a
very interesting kind of theory out there but
it's more in the combinatorial direction okay
and so I want to go a little bit more in that
direction in 2016 let's start there and talk
about some interesting counting problems naturally
associated with these four different types of data
structures okay that will also raise all kinds of
interesting questions and that's how we'll start
2016 with some counting and combinatorics I hope
you have a great festive season and I look forward
to your company in 2016 hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
you